welcome to newsletter number three i've
called this one manners and
misattributions and it follows on really
from newsletter number one and it's a
little hobbyhorse i've been on lately
and i can promise this might be the last
time for a while i mentioned this it's
just something that's been coming up in
the feeds lately and so on and today i'm
going to tell a little story which i
don't think has been told in full from
what i can tell out there online before
so look forward to that eventually when
we get there once again apologies for
the length i can only try to assure you
that next time the next newsletter will
be much much shorter than any of these
first three ones and in particular this
one which is a bit long now in
newsletter number one i was saying that
the traditional university system is
facing challenges so to speak not least
from high quality online education and
various other new institutions springing
up who might be shall we say stealing
away some of the best and brightest from
some of the old sandstone and ivy league
tertiary centers of learning there might
become a time where university really
becomes the place you go when you have
no other options it could end up being a
second rate place now i say this as a
person who loved the university
experience who aspired to spend a lot of
time at university but if i was 17 years
old now just coming out of high school
would i aspire to the university or
would i have commenced a youtube channel
a podcast and a blog while still in
school and then searched for other ways
to learn what i learned would i have
perhaps entrepreneurs or startups or
some other learning institutions
offering to pay me to study
rather than the other way around
it seems to be moving in that way
now i don't imagine this evolution will
be easy especially if there comes
something like a phase change moment
which in political science terms we
might call a revolution of sorts and i
don't think revolutions are very good
but an avalanche starts with small
stones we know this and i have spoken to
people already who are turned off
university and yet they're fully capable
of university as young people and there
are those stories becoming increasingly
more frequent of those who spend a year
or two in the university and then go off
and do something else
something is happening now of course
this has always happened you know people
drop out of university but to be a
dropout used to be pejorative now it's
like oh wow what better offer did you
get kind of thing we know that many of
the back stories of the tech wizards
avoided uni all together or they got out
quick once they found the problem with
which they fell in love until now they
have been the exception but might they
one day be the rule i don't know the
universities have long now been heavily
politicized but this is not that problem
that only makes things worse their
underlying problem is the failure to
adapt more quickly to the market i think
there must always be a role for
universities i'm optimistic about that
but it might be in the form more of
research institutions rather than
teaching especially teaching
undergraduates maybe that kind of
learning can always be better done
elsewhere maybe you only need a
university to learn from when you're a
post graduate and you need that more
one-on-one attention with the world's
greatest expert in a particular area i
don't know we're not quite there yet and
the university system is of course
highly profitable but that's because
there is an unending stream of students
all one needs to do in the university
finance department is ensure that the
standard or the requirements for entry
are broad enough as to allow well in the
limit anyone at all to attend so long as
they can pay the fees if that's your
standard you can be a viable business
for a long time i imagine diluting your
credential along the way which some
people won't care about for a long time
and by the way diluting the credentials
of everyone else who has that particular
certificate it's a form of inflation
really isn't it but i can also imagine
that if this happens
there will be teachers parents
professors and politicians
ready to pour scorn on the young
intellects who issue formal university
education
they will complain they the ones who
have not been to university
have not been properly enculturated or
socialized they lack the good manners of
broader society and so on and that's my
topic here today once more manners
manners in the year 2022 and in
preparing this here and now
as with newsletter one i wanted to refer
to this quote i've often used it before
and it's attributed to socrates and i've
attributed it to socrates before as well
it goes like this quote from socrates
our youth now love luxury they have bad
manners contempt for authority they show
disrespect for their elders and love
chatter in place of exercise they no
longer rise when elders entered the room
they contradicted their parents chatter
before company gobble up their food and
tyrannised their teachers
end quote
and i found that quote attributed to
socrates as written by
aristophanes apparently so two and a
half thousand years ago as i've often
quoted this i will often say something
after it like so for two and a half
thousand years the same sort of things
have been said over and over again
people have this tendency to run down
their own youth in society it's a great
quote it sounds great echoing through
the millennia and it makes that perfect
point millennia ago adults had the same
attitude towards the youth as they do
today
not much has changed
that may well be true but the quote i
have to tell you and some may already
know is a complete
misattribution well at best it's a
misattribution it's a fabrication at
worst it took a little effort to get to
the heart of the matter there are some
sites out there that do actually tell
you it's a misattribution but they don't
tell you the complete story they tell
you where it came from but i want to
tell you a little bit more
about the source of this quote and the
fact that the quote still actually can
kind of be used and carry the same
meaning as far as i can tell there's no
other source out there right here and
now other than me talking to you right
now that offers a more complete story
about this quote the origins of this
quote so here it is the quote is made up
but it comes in a form from an obscure
book on the schooling system of ancient
greece by a kenneth john freeman kenneth
john freeman was a student at cambridge
university in their bachelor of arts
program at the beginning of last century
so early 1900s
upon graduation he wanted to take up a
fellowship at trinity college and to
gain that position he needed to produce
quote some original work end quote so
that means an essay he wrote an essay on
the topic of ancient greek education but
sadly mr kenneth freeman died in 1906
and that was just three months before he
might have taken up his position at
trinity now whether it was the case that
the academics at trinity was so very
impressed by his work or just reasonably
well impressed but moved by how tragic
his early death was i don't know but
whatever the case his essay was rather
remarkably one would presume turned into
a book by them the academics at trinity
and published by the publishing house
macmillan and co no less in 1907 at the
beginning of the book there is an edited
statement that begins quote it has
fallen to my lot to edit this essay end
quote
which seems rather like it was a task
among many on that editor's desk that he
was not entirely enthused about either
that it's just a sign of the times which
i guess it was just a matter of speaking
and writing as the editor does go on to
praise mr freeman listing a remarkable
catalogue of academic achievements given
his short life so it seems he the late
mr freeman really was very highly
regarded as a scholar a reason i am
bothering with any of this is that
kenneth john freeman did indeed have
very high standards of scholarship and
wrote himself on the topic of studying
ancient texts though i found it would
apply to any book at all let me read you
an interesting quote from in the book he
says quote i have confined my attention
very largely for several years to
original texts and assured the aid of
commentaries
as to accepted interpretations i have
purposely and on principle neither read
nor heard much of them since i wished in
pursuance of the bidding of plato
himself not to receive unquestioningly
the authority of those whom to herd is
to believe but to develop views and
interpretations of my own
for i have always believed that
education suffers immensely from the
study of books about books in preference
to the study of the books themselves
end quote from mr kenneth freeman now
that to me is a remarkable thing so it
is all a mora travesty that one of his
very own quotes is misattributed
yes indeed that quote i've quoted so
often
apparently from socrates is as i say
from the work of kenneth john freeman
but he didn't quite write it so we'll
get to there but before we do i just
want to linger on what mr freeman says
right there i can't agree more when it
comes to subjects we know it's so often
the case that the commentators get
things wrong
journalists always seem to make errors
in areas where we ourselves claim some
degree of expertise or knowledge and as
i say so imagine how well they are
faring and all those other areas where
we do not know as much no better of
course whenever i read some other
philosopher's reflections on the work of
papa i am now unsurprised to read a
completely mangled misinterpretation
i think this is a function of an error
both of fans and foes of popra like by
the way they want to say what he really
meant and usually without quoting him
broadly enough they'll take things out
of context or not realize he clarified
things in later writings that in earlier
writings he did not quite express as he
wanted to later on often it all comes
down to about what papa actually meant
or actually thought about let's say
falsification and the commentator will
say this or that which is entirely
inconsistent when you read the man in
his own words in the context of some
entire chapter of a particular book it's
why i strive i hope when i speak about
the work of either david deutsch or karl
popper or anyone else
i continue to go to some length to say
these are my words i am not speaking for
these people when i quote them i will
quote them i will say that so and so
said otherwise
errors are entirely my own but academic
critiques usually
aren't of that kind especially in
philosophy
you read some philosopher holding some
important chair at some prestigious ivy
league institution and they say
something like well papa was a naive
falsificationist and well that's that
you really get quotes and really does
anyone ever bother with trying to
explain what conjectural knowledge is an
epistemology that denies the possibility
of strictly logical falsification of
that naive kind but never mind that
because you're claiming to represent the
mind of someone else and even fans of
papa for example get caught up in
debates about what he really meant by
what he wrote they go down this
justificationist and essentialist path
better to my mind just to explain your
own thoughts and reflections on the
matter at hand and then take
responsibility for just what you say
without playing the he said she said
game i like to think that i'm explaining
a philosophy or a world view or a theory
scientific or otherwise it doesn't
matter actually what david deutch
himself said or karl popper actually
said unless of course you're quoting
them and saying this is what they said
in which case you better get it right in
context there is epistemology and there
is physics and it doesn't matter what
popper deutsche einstein socrates or
feynman or anyone else said because
there is not einstein's physics strictly
there is physics and there is not
poppers epistemology there is
epistemology and it's not clear to me
that papa always was the most clear when
it comes to explaining some of this
because like any genius who gets to some
place first he's got the most muck and
mud and nonsense to clear out of the way
before making a path through for the
rest of us who then have a much easier
time seeing the road ahead so it's not
poppa's fault he wasn't always clear you
try being the first person to figure out
a precise epistemology that describes
conjectural knowledge in detail when
everyone around you is a platonus
dogmatically committed to justified true
belief
so anyways we should be careful when we
are saying papa meant so and so
not merely to quote him but to quote
some substantial part of what he said in
context and provide the context and even
then
it might all be pointless because what
we're actually interested in are the
ideas not who said what and all of that
is on a continuum with this here and now
a fabrication and a misattribution what
appears in mr freeman's book which is
titled by the way schools of helles with
the subtitle an essay on the practice
and theory of ancient greek education is
something very close to the quotation
that gets passed around and wrongly
attributed to socrates now i have not as
of yet read the entire book school of
helles but i did spend a couple of days
carefully reading the first two chapters
in order to locate amongst other things
the exact quote and determine its
complete context i do think the book for
its age and for the manner in which it
was published and came to publication is
very impressive and interesting work
because well how interesting is it to
learn about this whole subject school in
ancient greece freeman actually has a
wonderfully evocative way of writing in
the introduction he says that helles
ancient greece in other words was
basically the teacher of nations and
therefore that a study of how the
teacher of nations taught her own sons
and daughters could be informative and
in so wondering about how this teacher
of nations taught its own he wonders are
there lessons for the modern world he
asked the reader to consider this as i
say the book was published in 1907 so by
any metric i can find it's completely
out of copyright in australia copyright
on books is about 75 years and in the us
it's about 95 years and in the uk
there's something more complicated going
on but the longest duration i could find
is 70 years after the death of the last
surviving author
so in this case the author died in 1906
so for all the places that matter to me
for the purposes of this we can provide
the book online so it's there on my
website i'll provide the link in the
description here or in the article if
you're reading it and it's there as a
pdf or you can search my site for school
of helles if someone in authority or
with expert knowledge contacts me to say
remove that link and that pdf or else
will take you to court and they've got a
good reason then i'll do it but until
then i think i've got the law right if
it's not there then you'll know what
happened anyways let's get to the meat
of the matter if we go to page 71 which
is in chapter 2 freeman writes about how
as athens began to mature there was what
he called a period of juvenile
emancipation so the children no longer
had to till the fields and work quite so
hard as they had they were expected to
go to school and study that was the
worst of it and they experienced quote
luxury and indulgence end quote in the
closing decades of the 5th century bc
this freeman said caused quote
conservative thinkers to look back with
longing and no doubt idealizing eyes to
the good old times end quote he goes on
to say quote the sixth and early fifth
centuries came probably unjustly to be
regarded as the ideal age of education
when children learned obedience and
morality and were not pampered and
depraved when they were beautiful and
healthy not pale-faced stunted and
over-educated end quote freeman goes
through a number of people including
quotes from aristophanes who pines for
the times when children were seen and
not heard indeed for three or four pages
freeman speaks about ancient greeks
pining for the good old days when
children were better behaved when
compared with the present day young boys
who cavorted with ballet girls and flute
girls both of whom seem to be
disreputable types plato gets a mention
of course because he complains that
students are not sufficiently afraid of
their school masters and instead the
teacher flatters their students
and finally on page 74 in chapter two we
come to it where freeman writes and i
quotes quote the counts of the
indictment are luxury bad manners
contempt for authority disrespect to
elders and a love for chatter in place
of exercise he goes on to claim that
children began to be the tyrants not the
slaves of their households they no
longer rose from their seats when an
elder entered the room they contradicted
their parents chatted before company
gobbled up the dainties at the table and
committed various offences against
hellenic tastes such as crossing their
legs end quote and there it is
that's the quote by freeman freeman
himself summarizing what he read not by
attributing to a single author but
rather he was collecting together an
anonymous conglomeration of ancient
writers he'd pulled it all together
there and summarized what they've all
said so it wasn't socrates there was a
whole bunch of people who lived back
then around socrates time or just before
and he continues to write lots more in
this vein so the spirit of the quote is
quite right so the point can still be
made that yes even two and a half
thousand years ago we have textual
evidence that people in that enlightened
society were speaking of teenagers of
the youth as being you know ill-mannered
and so on and so forth it just wasn't
socrates which makes no difference to
the fact little has changed it seems in
two and a half thousand years the way in
which adults talk about the people who
are becoming adults so it was that
specific paragraph that i just read that
was taken and wrongly attributed to
socrates himself and worse it was
embellished and fabricated in part so
the original simply doesn't exist and is
instead a bastardization of the words of
freeman himself when summarizing what he
was taking away from reading these
ancient texts which complained in
various places about the youth as i say
the important thing to notice here is
the point stands the substance is
accurate and so it is true that these
attitudes towards children remain today
and the kids today are the same as they
essentially always have been in
enlightened societies and the reaction
of elders towards them
similarly predictable in retrospect now
i'll end on all this with a related
observation which is why i wanted to use
the quote in the first place about
committing offenses against taste in
other words being rude i think there's a
place for courtesy i really do
especially in academia because i think
it's a matter of efficiency and progress
rudeness is inefficient and it's not the
first time i've said that but i noticed
just a couple of days ago that a
navalism cropped up in my feed a quote
from naval ravikant and naval said at
one point quote unhappiness is
inefficient end quote which is very much
in tune with my sentiments unhappiness
rudeness it just gets in the way of
getting things done if you want to solve
the problem then be happy be energetic
and be polite so that all involved get
along and you're not quickly sidetracked
because someone gets their nose out of
joint about how you're behaving but
surely that's their problem you might
think well not anymore it's not now it's
your problem because you have to deal
with it if you want to work this thing
out and i'm seeing this in academia as
expressed online increasingly if two
people have different views and we
suspect that one of them might have
something closer to the truth it's good
if they can put their cases quickly and
efficiently and nut it out so to speak
have the encounter and see where the
truth is sadly though these days
especially with social media one side
begins to put the case but puts the case
so terribly so rudely so discourteously
the other person comes back in the same
way or simply never engages at all and
possibly quite rightly they never engage
as well who wants to experience the
personal unpleasantness of insults even
if they do engage it won't be on
substance but it'll be on style and so
the original topic gets derailed into
competing claims about professionalism
and so on i see this in once again
astrophysics rather often but you see it
everywhere and it means there exist out
there on social media monologues where
there should be dialogues there are
takedowns and destroyeds where there
should be collegial discussion of the
details i'll just end this with an
example i wouldn't normally personalize
things but as i'm quoting i have to
mention some names here like so many
others interested in science i find some
of what the most famous astrophysicist
on earth at this moment neil degrasse
tyson has to say at times fascinating
and very good for the culture of science
at other times i find it wrong and
misguided or filled with misconception
very well but i hope i've always tried
to focus on the ideas i don't think neil
is a crank or an ignoramus i think
perhaps like anyone who gets to that
level of fame he might sometimes find it
difficult to sift the good and
worthwhile signal of valid criticism
from the noise of critical insults
whatever the case i just do not
understand the point of an overtly
hostile tone for example i found this
article a blog post really from a
historian of science admittedly not an
astrophysicist not a mathematician
apparently links in the description
perhaps this particular historian does
wonderful work i don't know but i'm
disinclined to read anything else he has
written just because well it's a put off
to read that dr tyson quote
knows nothing and quote is spouting
total crap and quote he's supposedly
intelligent and to top it all off
apparently doing what he does quote he's
just doing it for the money end quote
i just do not understand parts of modern
academic culture or perhaps some modern
academics like i admit i have a public
facing top cast appearance and then i
have a way in which i am with my friends
when we hang out and perhaps one tends
not to use language that's quite so
formal in those situations i would be in
absolute pain in the neck if i was this
guy 24 7. so i'm not i don't think i'm
being dishonest in switching between
mildly different versions of public and
private personas i think i'm doing what
a human being does adapting to
situations as needed it's why we have
the phrase behind closed doors
and so i think an academic engaging and
other academic
and yes even on a personal blog if it's
going to be out there in public should
at least have some minimal level of
courtesy and not least because it's more
efficient that's professionalism i admit
neil tyson gets stuff wrong i can agree
with this historian of science who wrote
about him on every factual matter a
minor issue though it is so why is
getting his nose so terribly out of
joint on such a small issue i do not
know
but it all comes off as what we say in
australia tall poppy syndrome in other
words the historian just seems to me to
be upset that neil tyson has great fame
and success and so
holds him to a very different standard a
standard that says he's fair game for
being insulted which is a strange
standard when you think about it the
more successful you become the more
valid it is to insult you
i think the heuristic of writing as if
your mother or your partner or in this
case the subject you're writing about is
reading along is a reasonable heuristic
but academic culture is rapidly becoming
what journalistic culture became some
decades ago
politicized and then downright hostile
to anyone who fails to meet the moral
standards set by your side
i know what it does what effect it has
because i hear it i hear it from young
people it very much fails to impress the
youth
they get enough of that in their own
social groups the sniping and the
pettiness well in fact they probably get
less of it at times many of the kids
today who aspire to an intellectual life
or a life in academia are already in
mature social groups that navigate
disagreement well so what is sometimes
on display
between dueling phds or sometimes not
dueling sometimes as i say the monologue
tirade from one intellect all about
another is a real turn off as i say the
article i provide a link to
of that historian talking about tyson is
just an example but it speaks to a
broader phenomenon i write about in my
blog post astronomical disdain
my appeal is for perhaps just a little
more good humid courtesy to be shown
when some disagreement arises even if
that disagreement is for another
scientist or a celebrity or a celebrity
scientist or a billionaire or a
celebrity billionaire we have to expect
that people are fallible no matter how
famous or wealthy they are and error is
the natural state of things in the world
so what logically follows is that people
will disagree if academia and the
intelligentsia is going to be anything
to the rest of culture
shouldn't it be an example of how to
navigate disagreement
if the ladies and gentlemen and what
does disney apparently say now dreamers
of all ages if the dreamers of all ages
of academia and the expert class cannot
show well let's say some class then what
hope is there for the rest of
civilization well perhaps quite a bit it
could just be a generational thing the
gen y and gen z academics might be
putting on a bit of a show but it could
be enough to show the zoomers
those who are still in high school are
about to leave high school how not to
behave online
perhaps perhaps not if it's acceptable
for academy award winners to commit
violence live on camera against
comedians telling jokes and then get a
standing ovation perhaps the tolerance
for unpleasantness in social situations
is high enough now that we should expect
our highly qualified doctors and
professors to be slinging insults at
each other perhaps it's always been so
there was that poker incident after all
between popper and wittgenstein but even
if it has been this way there should be
something better to aspire to
before i finish up this one has again
once more been released into my usual
feed but it will be the last of these
newsletters that is released into my
podcast feed or put onto my youtube
channel the rest will be much shorter i
do promise
so if you're hearing this in the podcast
feed or watching on youtube note the
link for signing up in the description
to this video or podcast for my
newsletter as i said last time as well
i'd rather everything i create or almost
everything to remain entirely free and
available to everyone
and the reasons are that the people i
admire most have always done this
there's a long tradition of this in
knowledge creation especially science of
just putting your stuff out there for
free
and most of what i talk about here is at
least in part influenced by other people
and a lot of the original ideas don't
originate with me but with them so it
would seem strange to charge for ideas
not my own
and of course most importantly i think
out of all of these the work i do in
spreading any of these ideas of optimism
and the world view of david deutsch karl
popper richard feynman and so on
the ideas around physics and philosophy
i want them to spread as far as possible
so putting no barriers like cost in
front of that is really important
all of that said i do accept donations
for the same reason anyone accepts any
payment ever one's got bills to pay they
might need to upgrade their technology
at times so i can continue to have some
fancy visuals in some of my videos so i
do have a means of donation for those
who'd like to support me go to
www.bretthall.org
and there on the front page are links to
patreon and paypal and i should let you
know that for those who do contribute
i've been happy to engage with people
one-on-one over the last few months in
asynchronous voice messaging that seems
to work really well
my support is a smaller number which
makes that kind of thing feasible for
the time being until next time bye-bye